JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: The Trump administrationfaces several crises overseas.
We examine America abroad and the international
challenges facing the new president.
Then, we return to Mexico, strengthening its
southern border against Central Americans
fleeing north to escape violence and poverty.
NICK SCHIFRIN: There's a private security
company that prevents migrants from getting
on the train, and they have built these concrete
barriers just a few inches from the edge of
the train.
The idea is to make it much more dangerous
to jump from the train.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And learning history through
song.
High school students compose a choral history
lesson about World War II Japanese American
internment camps.
MAS YAMASHITA, Held in Internment Camp: It's
my hope that people can really look at this
as saying, we can't isolate a group of people
just for who they are.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. military blasted Islamic
State fighters in Afghanistan today with the
biggest non-nuclear bomb in the American arsenal.
The target was a tunnel complex in Nangarhar
province near the Pakistani border.
The bomb contains 11 tons of explosives, and
had never been used in actual combat.
President Trump said it shows the U.S. istaking the fight to ISIS.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the United States:
If you look at what's happened over last eight
weeks and compare that to really what's happened
over the last eight years, you will see there's
a tremendous difference.
Tremendous difference.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just last week, a U.S. Army
special forces soldier was killed in the same
area where the bomb was dropped.
Syria's President Bashar al-Assad is out with
a fresh denial of any role in a poison gas
attack which last week killed 87 people, including
children.
The U.S. responded a few days later with a
cruise missile strike on a Syrian military
air base.
Assad spoke with Agence France-Presse and
said he would agree to an impartial investigation.
BASHAR AL-ASSAD, President of Syria (through
translator): We don't have any chemical weapons.
We gave up our arsenal a few years ago.
Even if we have them, we wouldn't use them,
and we have never used our chemical arsenal
in our history.
Our impression is that the West, mainly the
United States, is hand in glove with the terrorists.
They fabricated the whole story in order tohave a pretext for the attack.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, the Syrian army
claims that the U.S. coalition hit an Islamic
State chemical weapons warehouse last nightand killed hundreds of people.
Separately, the Pentagon acknowledged another
strike in Syria mistakenly killed 18 rebels
who were battling ISIS.
The European Court of Human Rights ruled today
that the Russian government used excessive
force in reacting to a school siege back in
2004.
More than 330 people died in the southern
Russian city of Beslan.
About half were children.
Heavily armed Islamic militants associated
with the Chechen Republic stormed the school,
triggering a nearly three-day stand-off.
Russian forces used tanks and grenade launchers
to end the siege.
Moscow vowed to appeal today's ruling.
Back in this country, President Trump signed
legislation that lets states deny federal
funds to Planned Parenthood.
It also includes other groups that provide
abortions.
The action rescinds an Obama era rule that
said states could not block the money.
And, on Wall Street, it followed financial
stocks lower today.
The Dow Jones industrial average lost 138points to close at 20453.
The Nasdaq fell 31, and the S&P 500 gave up
16.
Still to come on the "NewsHour": the international
challenges facing the Trump administration;
changing course, the president's shifting
views on domestic policies; the deported -- Mexico
secures its own border; and much more.
The last week has seen significant changes
in the way the Trump White House views the
world.
And what began as a presidency emphasizing
retrenchment on the home front has been quickly
refocused on the U.S. role abroad.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the United States:
USA!
JUDY WOODRUFF: He bills himself the America
first president, but it's world affairs that
have risen to the top of his agenda lately.
Syria's use of chemical weapons, the U.S.
response, and President Trump's own words
have raised fresh questions about his foreign
policy.
DONALD TRUMP: Right now, the world is a mess.
But I think, by the time we finish, I think
it's going to be a lot better place to live.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still, on Syria, for one example,there are competing messages.
Defense Secretary James Mattis said Tuesday
the priority remains defeating the Islamic
State, and not removing President Bashar al-Assad,
despite last week's poison gas attack.
JAMES MATTIS, U.S. Secretary of Defense: This
was a separate issue that arose in the midst
of that campaign, the use by the Assad regime
of chemical weapons, and we addressed that
militarily.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But Mr. Trump sounded a harsher
note yesterday, calling Assad an animal, and
worse.
DONALD TRUMP: That's a butcher.
That's a butcher.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The issue dominated Secretary
of State Rex Tillerson's tense visit to Moscow
yesterday.
Tillerson said relations with Russia were
at a low point.
Mr. Trump agreed, but said he hopes for an
eventual thaw.
DONALD TRUMP: It'd be a fantastic thing if
we got along with Putin and if we got along
with Russia, and that could happen.
And it may not happen.
It may be just the opposite.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Today, the president tweeted:
"Things will work out fine between the USA
And Russia.
At the right time, everyone will come to their
senses and there will be lasting peace."
Another obstacle to that lasting peace is
North Korea's nuclear testing and missile
program.
The president has dispatched an American aircraft
carrier group to the region, and he's pressing
China's President Xi Jinping to help bring
the North to heel.
DONALD TRUMP: He's a terrific person.
We spent a lot of time together in Florida.
And he's a very special man.
So, we will see how it goes.
I think he's going to try very hard.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That vow comes amid reports
that Pyongyang may be readying for another
nuclear test.
And Japan warns the North may now be able
to load a missile warhead with nerve gas.
For more on the challenges facing the Trump
White House, and its options going forward,
we turn to two men with deep military and
diplomatic knowledge.
Ambassador William Burns retired from the
State Department in 2014, after serving as
deputy secretary of state under President
Obama.
He also was ambassador to Russia and to Jordan
over his 33-year diplomatic career.
He is now the president of the Carnegie Endowment
for International Peace.
And Retired Admiral James Stavridis, he served
as NATO supreme allied commander from 2009
to 2013, the first Naval officer to hold that
position.
After 37 years in the U.S. Navy, he now serves
as dean of the Fletcher School of Law and
Diplomacy at Tufts University.
And we welcome both of you to the "NewsHour."
Right now, we're thinking we remember all
this analysis during the campaign that this
was a president who was going to be reluctant
to use U.S. force abroad, to project the United
States militarily.
But, Admiral Stavridis, with now this news
today of dropping a bomb in Afghanistan, the
strike on the airfield in Syria, the threat,
in effect, toward North Korea, are we seeing
something very different, a president who
is very prepared to use military force?
ADM.
JAMES STAVRIDIS (RET.), Former NATO Supreme
Allied Commander: I think, if you look at
the personality involved, there's always been
a persona of toughness about Donald Trump,
so I'm not shocked or even really surprised
at this.
It does fly in the face of some of his campaign
rhetoric, Judy, but I do think that the strike
in Syria, which I believe is really the one
to concentrate on, is a fairly well-thought-out
strategic message that says the United States
will use force, we intend to be at the table
in the Middle East, and I think has hopefully
a sobering impact both on China and on North
Korea.
The big bomb today is really a tactical move.
It is a big bomb, but it is not going the
change facts on the ground or send a big signal.
It's the strike in Syria to focus on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ambassador Burns, do you see
a strategy in all of this right now?
WILLIAM BURNS, Former U.S. Deputy Secretary
of State: I think every new administration
undergoes a lot of changes on first contact
with reality.
But I have to admit that the pace and scope
of the changes we have seen even in the last
few days in the Trump administration really
do make your head spin a little bit.
And I think the big question is whether or
not the tactical shifts, the reactions, the
impulses add up to a strategy, in other words,
a coherent and disciplined approach to America's
role in the world, which lays emphasis on
our alliances, on our ability to mobilize
other countries around the world to deal with
common problems, that sees them not as millstones,
as the Trump campaign rhetoric often held,
but as huge assets which set us apart from
lonelier major powers, like Russia and China.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But apply that question, Admiral
Stavridis, to the situation in Syria, because
-- what you just referred to.
I mean, on the one hand, you have the administration
saying this was just a one-off, it was an
attempt to send a signal to President Assad
that the U.S. will react if he uses chemical
weapons again.
On the other hand, you have the president
describing President Assad as an animal, as
we have heard.
It isn't entirely clear, I think, to everyone
watching what the U.S. approach to Syria is.
ADM.
JAMES STAVRIDIS: I completely agree, both
with your comment and with Ambassador Burns.
I think it is interesting to note that all
this occurs with an overlay of the NATO secretary-general
coming to Washington and having a -- by all
accounts, a very good meeting with President
Trump, I think, bolstering the point that
Ambassador Burns is making is that America
is so much better, so much stronger together
with our allies, with our friends.
And I hope that, in Syria, NATO can be brought
along to be part of a coalition against the
Islamic State and perhaps over time against
Assad.
We will see.
But the salient point here is the use of forceand the willingness to do so.
I agree with Ambassador Burns, we have yet
to see a coherent strategy emerge.
Let's hope that we do, and let's hope it includes
the ideas of allies, partners and friends.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Apply the question, Ambassador
Burns, the one you just raised a minute ago,
to what we're seeing in Syria, and connect
that to this what appears to be new approach
the Russia.
The president sounded very complimentary toward
Vladimir Putin again for months and months.
Now he is saying Putin is on the wrong sideof this major question in Syria.
WILLIAM BURNS: Well, it was an illusion to
think that the Trump administration was going
to be able to pull off a grand bargain, a
total normalization of U.S.-Russia relations,
because there's too much of a disconnect,
I think, right now in the way each of us,
Putin's Russia and the United States, sees
our role in the world and sees the question
of international order.
But I have to admit I'm surprised with the
speed with which things have flipped over
the course of just the last week or so.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How does what you're hearing,
Admiral Stavridis, the administration say
and do about Russia fit into what you just
described a moment ago with regard to NATO
and the fact that this does now seem to be
a president who is ready to work with NATO?
ADM.
JAMES STAVRIDIS: I think it's a reflection
of the fact that there has been a reset.
We used to talk a lot about the reset with
Russia, which hoped to move us in a positive
direction.
Here, we see a reset of reality.
Exactly as Ambassador Burns says, it's a wave
of Russian bad behavior washing over.
That, Judy, has a very salutary effect on
NATO.
Its stock goes up as Russia's stock goes down,
precisely because, in order to work with Russia,
we have to project strength to Russia.
That means using the NATO alliance as part
of that.
I would say that we should confront Russia
where we must, on Syria, cyber-attacks on
the United States, on the invasion of Ukraine
and the annexation of Crimea, confront where
we must, but cooperate where we can.
Let's find some zones of cooperation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There's so much more I want
to ask you both about, including China, but
I don't want to let you get away, Ambassador
Bill Burns, without asking about just the
president's approach, this unpredictability,
this notion that he's keeping America's allies
and adversaries off-balance.
Is that a strategy, in and of itself?
WILLIAM BURNS: I mean, occasionally, unpredictability
can be a useful thing.
But I think you have also got to be careful
about, you know, the importance of consistency
in American foreign policy.
Whether it's friends or foes, we generally
get further in the world when we're consistent
and coherent in how we approach our strategy
in the world, because, otherwise, friends
begin to doubt our resolve, or sometimes doubt
our leadership, and foes are attempted to
try the take advantage when they're not sure
the approach the United States is going to
take.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Admiral Stavridis, what about
that?
ADM.
JAMES STAVRIDIS: Agree completely.
And I will simply add to it that, again, we
want to be tactically surprising.
We don't want to telegraph our raid or the
weapons system we're going to use or where
the next carrier strike group is going to
pop up.
But, strategically, we need consistency, we
need a plan.
And that is yet to be seen from this administration.
I do feel that the last few days, we have
seen things moving in a better direction.
Let's be hopeful that that kind of strategic
consistency evolves, that we keep tactical
surprise when we need to.
Together, they will help us create a positive
foreign policy.
WILLIAM BURNS: And if you want to pursue the
kind of strategy that Jim Stavridis was just
describing, you have got to be able to sustain
the institutions that help you to carry that
out.
And when you propose a budget that would essentially
gut some of those institutions, reduce by
30 percent, at least in the projection, you
know, the State Department's budget, the budget
for foreign assistance, you're creating a
situation in which you're almost inevitably
going to over-rely on the use of force as
your tool of first resort, and you're going
to miss opportunities diplomatically, as well
as using foreign assistance smartly with regard
to key fragile states to try to avoid the
kind of conflicts and failures that ultimately
drag in the U.S. military, at far greater
cost.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All of which is worth takinganother long look at that.
Ambassador Bill Burns, Admiral James Stavridis,we thank you both very much.
WILLIAM BURNS: Thanks so much.
ADM.
JAMES STAVRIDIS: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump has been observed
to change his stated position on issues, sometimes
within days or even hours of what he last
said.
The president and his team have said he's
being flexible, and that many people have
changed their views to match his.
But he has made some moves that reverse statements
he made during the campaign, in particular
on economic policy.
Hari Sreenivasan in our New York studio has
our -- has more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For President Trump, it's
all about pointing out that he's done what
he said he'd do.
He tweeted last night that his administration
has kept promises on the border, on energy,
on jobs, on regulations.
But he's also made a series of reversals in
recent days.
In an interview yesterday with The Wall Street
Journal, he said he will not label China as
a currency manipulator.
That's a stark departure from his posture
throughout the presidential campaign that
he'd brand Beijing on day one.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the United States:
We are going to stand up to China on its massive
currency manipulation, because they are beating
our companies.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And just 11 days ago, he
told The Financial Times that the Chinese
were the -- quote -- "world champions" of
cheapening their currency to boost exports.
Then came his meeting with Chinese President
Xi Jinping.
Now Mr. Trump says Xi's government is not
currently manipulating its currency, and that
claiming otherwise might jeopardize Chinesecooperation on North Korea.
In the same interview, the president said
he wouldn't release guidelines for tax reform
legislation until he gets health care done.
That underscored what he said during a FOX
Business interview a day earlier.
DONALD TRUMP: We have a great health care
plan that I think will happen, and, if it
happens, then I go immediately to tax reform.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But that's a 180 from last
month, after House Republicans failed to rally
the votes to repeal and replace Obamacare.
DONALD TRUMP: So, now we're going to go for
tax reform, which I have always liked.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And on the subject of taxes,
in the FOX interview, the president declined
to say outright that he'd support the so-called
border adjustment tax to give U.S. companies
favorable treatment on exports and imports.
DONALD TRUMP: When I hear border adjustment,adjustment means we lose.
We lose.
So, I don't like the term border adjustment.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The president also didn't
rule out keeping Federal Reserve Chair Janet
Yellen for another term.
And he said he likes the fed's low-interest
rate policy.
During the campaign, he said the opposite
on both Yellen and interest rates.
Ditto on the Export-Import Bank.
On the campaign trail, he called it unnecessary.
In The Wall Street Journal interview, he praised
it for helping small businesses and overseas
companies that buy American.
Let's try to unpack some of the reasoning
behind these changes and their impact.
Carol Lee of The Wall Street Journal interviewedthe president on Wednesday.
And Robert Costa covers the White House for
The Washington Post.
Carol, let me start with you.
Currency manipulation, not something we talk
about very often, but the president did talk
a lot about this on the campaign trail.
And what he said to you was the opposite of
what he's been saying for a very long time.
CAROL LEE, The Wall Street Journal: That's
right.
During the campaign, then-candidate Trump
promised many times -- it was one of his go-to
lines -- that he wouldn't only label China
a currency manipulator, but do it on day one
of his presidency.
And when he spoke to us yesterday in our interview,
he was asked about this, and his response
was twofold.
One, he said, China is no longer a currency
manipulator, so he doesn't need to label them
a currency manipulator, that they have been
-- haven't been manipulating their currency,
he said, since he took office; they have been
doing it for some time before that.
But he -- that was his first reasoning.
And, number two, he said, even if they were
manipulating their currency, now is not the
time, because he needs China to take steps
to help him implement a policy that confronts
North Korea, the North Korea threat.
So, it's two reasons, but it's a pretty significant
reversal, because it's one that he -- a promise
that he made multiple times on the campaign
trail, and now he's saying he doesn't need
to do it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Robert, health care, according
to these interviews, is back on the table.
How come?
You famously got the phone call after the
health care bill didn't make it to the floor.
And he said that it's not health care.
It's, we're moving on the taxes.
What happened, do you think?
ROBERT COSTA, The Washington Post: There's
a big push from the Republican base to have
the GOP majorities in the Congress and, of
course, the White House follow through on
the promises they made during the 2016 campaign.
You saw this on the ground this past week
in the Kansas House special election.
You see it ahead of next Tuesday, where there
is a special House election in Georgia.
Republicans want to see action on health care
and on taxes.
That's why, as much as the president told
me and others that he may shelve the health
care bill for the moment and look for Democrats
down the line to come back to the bargaining
table, he's at the top of a party that wants
movement.
And that's why we see Congress during this
recess starting to reengage on that issue.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Carol, was there some rationale
that he offered to you all about why his thinking
is changing on these things?
CAROL LEE: Well, there were different rationales
for different changes that he made.
He discussed the one about currency manipulation.
He also talked about his views on the chairwoman
of the Federal Reserve, Janet Yellen, who
he was sharply critical of during the campaign.
And he said he met her, he liked her, he respects
her.
And he left open the possibility of nominating
her again.
He spoke about Russia, about China.
There was one particular instance where very
early on in the interview he talked about
President Xi of children, and meeting him,
and how he went into that meeting telling
him that he thought it was easy for China
to pressure North Korea, that they had a lot
of power over North Korea, and he should be
able to easily handle that issue.
And he said that President Xi then went into
the history of China and Korea, and within
10 minutes, President Trump said that he realized
it's not so easy for China to just take care
of the North Korea problem, because they don't
have as much power as he thought they did.
So, there is -- you know, he kind of walkedthrough his thinking on that.
And so he's a little more sympathetic to the
Chinese in terms of what they're able to do
to help him on the North Korea issue.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Robert, how much of this
-- I mean, what Carol is saying, certainly
some part of it is the president realizing
that things are much more complicated when
you're actually behind the desk.
How much of it is also the forces that are
at work inside the White House, the different
power struggles that you have been documenting?
ROBERT COSTA: The political environment inside
of the West Wing is certainly a factor as
President Trump thinks through his decisions.
Based on my reporting, there are certain people
right now who have very influential voices
in the ear of the president, in particular
Gary Cohn, the president's top economic adviser,a
former Goldman Sachs executive, Dina Powell,
the deputy national security adviser and a
former George W. Bush official in that White
House, as well as Jared Kushner, his son-in-law,
and his daughter Ivanka.
They come out of a more centrist Republican
and even Democratic mold, when speaking of
Cohn, who is still a registered Democrat.
And they're urging the president privately
to more in a more mainstream, centrist direction.
You also have H.R. McMaster, the new national
security adviser, who is a Republican hawk.
So, these non-interventionist instincts that
we saw during the campaign with the president
seem to have faded a bit with the Syria strike
and now this action in Afghanistan.
And you see Stephen Bannon, the populist nationalist
at the president's side, being demoted, still
in the White House, but not as influential.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Carol, speaking of Stephen
Bannon, he didn't do him any favors.
He sort of almost distanced himself from him,
or at least minimized his role during the
president's interview with you.
CAROL LEE: He did.
It was a very interesting moment.
We asked him what to make of his comments
the previous day in The New York Post, where
he said that -- you know, he really distanced
himself from Steve Bannon, said that he's
his own -- the president said he's his own
strategist and tried to diminish that role.
And we said, well, what should we make of
those comments?
And the president's response was, well, you
know, he's a guy who works for me, which is
a really understatement.
And he said -- he also said, I am my own strategist.
And, in saying that, it was something that
he repeated again, it was very clear that
he is trying to set the tone that he wants
-- that he's in charge, and he not only was
frustrated with some of the overshadowing
that was happening with Steve Bannon and some
of the parodies that were out there about
him and how he was controlling Trump.
I think the president also then, as Robert
reported, got very frustrated with the infighting,
particularly between Steve Bannon and his
son-in-law.
And he said that he told them that they needed
to work it out.
We asked him if he planned on having the same
team in six months.
And he said, I like my team, but I don't know.
Maybe I will make some changes.
Maybe I won't.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Robert, finally to you,
how do you cover a president like this who
tells The Financial Times 10 days before Carol's
interview something company different than
what he tells Carol, and then perhaps, the
next time you talk with him, it's going to
be something else?
ROBERT COSTA: In a way, it's almost predictable,
having covered the president for a few years,
as has Carol, very deeply over the last few
years.
You know that this is a nonideological president.
Unlike President Obama, who was mounting his
own version of a liberal progressive project,
or George W. Bush with his compassionate conservatism,
or even with Ronald Reagan, decades ago, with
his conservative movement, with Trump, you
have a president who, at the center of it
all, wants to do what's best for him, his
own popularity, his own standing, rather than
necessarily his party or an ideology.
So, he is susceptible to shift with the politicalwinds and to make decisions.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right.
Robert Costa of The Washington Post, Carol
Lee of The Wall Street Journal, thank you
both.
ROBERT COSTA: Thank you.
CAROL LEE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": what the U.S.
could learn from simpler tax systems used
by other countries; high school students write
a musical work about U.S. internment camps;
and a lawyer's brief take on racial injustice
in America.
But, next, we head back to Mexico.
On Tuesday, we reported from Mexico's northern
border with the U.S. Tonight, we travel to
Mexico's southern border.
Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador are the
world's deadliest countries outside war zones.
Many Central Americans flee violence and poverty,
and hope to reach the U.S. Mexican authorities
are now trying to block their movement, but
critics are asking, at what cost?
Special correspondent Nick Schifrin begins
his report tonight in Ciudad Hidalgo on Mexico's
southern tip, on the river that separates
Mexico from Guatemala.
NICK SCHIFRIN: On this border, the sound ofthe water is the sound of hope.
The Suchiate River separates Guatemala from
the southern Mexican state of Chiapas.
Every day, thousands of Central Americans
cross north, dreaming of more peaceful and
prosperous lives.
There's no security and no authorities.
The rafts are inner tubes with plywood planks.
Entire families travel together.
Women bring their children.
Each crossing costs 50 cents, but many can't
afford that, so, on this day, the water is
low enough to walk across for free barefoot.
Leading the way in the backpacks are 21-year-old
Dilber Avila and his 15-year-old brother,
Eduardo Hernandez.
They're from Honduras.
DILBER AVILA, Honduran Migrant (through translator):
We're very poor there.
The house we live in is made of mud.
It could collapse on us at any point.
So, we went on our way to look for a better
life.
NICK SCHIFRIN: They're unsure how far north
they will go.
They have heard the route is dangerous, but
they're hopeful and willing to sacrifice.
DILBER AVILA (through translator): This path
is tricky.
You never know how it will go.
With the help of our lord watching over us
as we travel, we pray, and he sends angels
to help us on our journey.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In total, 450,000 people arecrossing the border every year.
Some will just go for the day to shop or sell.
But for many others, this is the first moment
of a long, dangerous journey north.
Their first destination is the Mexican city
of Tapachula.
The shelter run by Todo Por Ellos, or All
For Them, offers them a safe place to stay.
In the last two years, more than 900,000 unaccompanied
Central American children have crossed into
Mexico.
Eleven-year-old Luis Uno de Lyon fled El Salvadorto escape horrific violence.
LUIS UNO DE LYON, El Salvadorian Asylum Seeker
(through translator): I have a brother who
was in a gang, and they told me they wanted
to kill me.
They entered my house.
They hit me, and they said they will kill
me.
I had to leave.
My dream as an immigrant is to reach America
and meet my mother.
I don't want to stay here.
I want to go and stay in America.
NICK SCHIFRIN: This has been his bed for the
last three months.
What do you want to be when you grow up?
A migration judge.
Why?
LUIS UNO DE LYON (through translator): To
help migrants achieve their dreams.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Increasingly, those dreams
stay alive here, outside the local immigration
office.
This group of Hondurans are applying for Mexican
humanitarian visas so they can travel north
more safely.
JONATHAN JIMENEZ, Honduran Asylum Seeker (through
translator): I am trying to get to America.
I know that there are many risks traveling
through Mexico safely, and I have heard about
people getting hurt.
This permit will protect me.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Twenty-two-year-old JonathanJimenez is from Honduras.
He says, under President Trump, the U.S. is
harder to reach and deportations are more
likely.
But he won't be dissuaded.
JONATHAN JIMENEZ (through translator): Even
if I can just $100 a month, it means a lot.
America is the land of opportunity.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But Mexico has always struggled
to assist Central Americans who are here temporarily
before they move north.
At night, the group of Hondurans wanders the
street.
They didn't bring any paperwork from home,
so they can't work.
They can't afford to rent rooms.
Where will you sleep tonight?
Where will you sleep?
JONATHAN JIMENEZ (through translator): Thetruth is that we don't know.
I haven't been told, and no one knows where
they will go.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Why is it worth being here
in order to try and get to the U.S.?
JONATHAN JIMENEZ (through translator): There
are gangs and so much crime and violence back
home.
I believe that this is an important goal that
I must achieve, and all the suffering will
be worth it.
I have to think about helping my family.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Forty-year-old Rosa has decided,
to help her family, she has to stay in Mexico.
She's from El Salvador, and has lived here
for four months.
She received asylum because she fled violence.
She sits with her nephew.
ROSA, Refugee (through translator): Then theysent someone to attack me.
They asked me for $75.
I couldn't afford that kind of extortion.
NICK SCHIFRIN: She longs to live in the U.S.,
but the journey would cost $5,000.
So she's staying.
Tapachula is safe.
ROSA (through translator): I wake up early,
and nothing happens.
I am out until late, and it's safe.
Back home, at 6:00 p.m., everyone goes inside,
and you can find danger at every corner.
NICK SCHIFRIN: More and more Central Americansare deciding to stay in Mexico.
In 2011, 752 Central Americans applied for
asylum.
In 2017, the U.N. estimates that number will
be more than 22,000.
PAOLA BOLOGNESI, U.N. Refugee Agency: These
are really the persons who have no choice
but to leave their country in order to save
their life
NICK SCHIFRIN: Paola Bolognesi is a U.N. RefugeeAgency protection officer.
She says asylum requests are increasing becauseof a U.N. education campaign.
PAOLA BOLOGNESI (through translator): We are
making a big effort in providing this information
through posters and leaflets and talks.
NICK SCHIFRIN: At the same time, migrant arrivals
are decreasing, in part of because of Mexican
efforts to stop them.
For the last three years, the government has
created rings of security within 100 miles
of the border.
Police use checkpoints to find drugs and migrants.
Mexico is now finding and deporting more Central
Americans than the United States is.
In the past, the train known as La Bestia,
or The Beast, was covered in Central Americans
riding north toward the U.S.
But, today, Mexican authorities have tried
to make it much more difficult for migrants
to ride these trains.
There's a private security company that prevents
migrants from getting on the train, and they
have built these concrete barriers just a
few inches from the edge of the train.
The idea is to make it much more dangerous
to jump from the train.
That danger has reduced the number of train
riders, but it's also killed three migrants
in this stretch, says immigrant rights activist
Sergio Luna.
SERGIO LUNA, Immigrants Rights Activist (through
translator): This type of structure is a clear
violation against the human rights of migrants.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Luna runs La Sagrada Familia
shelter right next to the train tracks.
We are 500 miles north of the Mexico-Guatemala
border.
He says Mexico's methods to deter migrants
are brutal.
SERGIO LUNA (through translator): Mexico doesthe U.S.' dirty work, in a way.
We're at a turning point when it comes to
a marked increase in institutionalized violence
against migrants.
NICK SCHIFRIN: A pro-immigration activist
Web site hosted this video of immigration
agents abusing a Honduran migrant.
An immigration official told "PBS NewsHour"
this was a -- quote -- "rational use of force."
Why can't you better protect these migrants
who are moving north?
CARLOS SADA SOLANA, Mexican Deputy Foreign
Minister: The issue is that it is not the
authorities that are violating human rights.
You know that you have to include drug trafficking.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Carlos Sada Solana is Mexico's
deputy foreign minister.
But do you acknowledge that there are some
authorities in Southern Mexico that are abusing
these migrants?
CARLOS SADA SOLANA: Well, I think that everywhere.
You cannot say that, in the United States,
there is not.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But many of the migrants accuse
authorities of threats and extortion.
Twenty-one-year-old David Gonzales is from
Honduras.
He crossed the border 18 days ago, hoping
to get to the U.S.
DAVID GONZALES, Honduran Migrant (through
translator): I was approached by state police.
They took me to the station, accused me of
burglary, took everything I had, stripped
me down and left me naked.
They gave me a choice.
I can either take my money, and they will
lock me up for a crime I didn't commit, or
I can leave without my money.
I left.
We're no longer migrants, but a business forthose who take advantage of us.
NICK SCHIFRIN: He used to live in Texas and
North Carolina, and made in one day as a gardener
what it took him one week to make at home.
But he says he's now giving up on getting
back to the U.S.
DAVID GONZALES (through translator): It's
no longer worth it.
Laws have changed.
A new president has been inaugurated who doesn't
want us, because he says we're the bad guys.
What he doesn't understand, with all due respect,
the migrant who goes there goes just to work.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Twenty-five-year-old Alner
Mendez has also given up his American dream.
We met him on the train tracks.
ALNER MENDEZ, Guatemalan Migrant (through
translator): I was scared of being detained.
It wasn't worth me going.
There's so many people who have lived in the
United States for years who are being deported.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But he says he's been treated
so badly here, he doesn't trust Mexico either.
So he's headed south, back home to Guatemala.
ALNER MENDEZ (through translator): I don'tfeel safe here in Mexico.
Aside from organized crime, authorities also
extort us.
They ask us for money.
And if we don't hand it over, they beat us.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Mendez climbs the train, andasks his friend for a photo.
It's the closest he will get to the journey
north.
The train leaves empty, without him, without
the Central Americans whose difficult journey
through Mexico meant they lost hope.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Nick Schifrin
in Apizaco, Mexico.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's tax season, a dreaded
time for many Americans feeling burdened as
they complete forms that many argue have become
too complicated.
So, as Congress and President Trump weigh
changes to the tax system, our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman, looks at what we can learn from
other countries.
It's part of his series Making Sense, which
airs every Thursday.
PAUL SOLMAN: Taxes.
Americans have been griping about them ever
since the revolution.
RONALD REAGAN, President of the United States:
I would like to speak to you tonight about
our future.
PAUL SOLMAN: Two hundred years later, in 1985,
President Ronald Reagan gave this assessment
of the tax code:
RONALD REAGAN: Complicated, unfair, cluttered
with gobbledygook and loopholes designed for
those with the power and influence to hire
high-priced legal and tax advisers.
PAUL SOLMAN: The next year, Reagan signed
into law our last major income tax reform:
lower rates, fewer loopholes.
A lot of good it did.
Thirty years later, House Speaker Paul Ryan
told Judy Woodruff:
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of the House: We
have the worst tax code in the industrialized
world, bar none.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, what we can learn from therest of the world about taxes?
Writer T.R.
Reid took us to the New Zealand Embassy in
Washington to explain.
T.R.
REID, Author, "A Fine Mess": New Zealand isa model of good tax policy.
They have done what all the economists think
is right, to get a tax code that is simple,
fair and efficient.
PAUL SOLMAN: Reid, a former Washington Post
foreign bureau chief, has reported from around
the world for decades.
For his latest book, "A Fine Mess," Reid went
on a global quest for a better tax system.
He really liked New Zealand's formula, BBLR.
T.R.
REID: BBLR, broaden the base, lower the rates.
So, you broaden the base by making everything
taxable.
If your employer gives you free parking, well,
in New Zealand, they say, gee, that would
cost $20 a month.
That's income to you.
If your employer pays your health insurance,
that's income to you.
And then, you know, you want to buy a housewith a mortgage, that's fine.
You don't get a tax break for it.
They have rates less than half of ours, and
they bring in more money per capita.
PAUL SOLMAN: And for Kiwis like Ben Contreras
(ph), filing couldn't be simpler.
BEN CONTRERAS, New Zealander: I never thought
about taxes when I lived in New Zealand.
For most people, you don't really have to
take any time out to take care of your taxes
every year.
PAUL SOLMAN: But Contreras has worked in the
U.S. for three years.
Filing his taxes now requires the help of
often bedeviling computer software, a heavy
price to pay, says Reid.
T.R.
REID: Americans spend about six billion hours
a year collecting the data and filling out
the forms.
We spend $10 billion to H&R Block and other
preparers and, on top of that, $2 billion
in tax preparation software, which still takes
hours of work.
And it's outrageous, the burden we put on
people.
PAUL SOLMAN: And how long does it take to
do your income taxes or file your income taxes
in some of these countries, if it's so simple?
T.R.
REID: I was in the Netherlands on March 31,
the day before their taxes are due.
I was with an executive who makes $200,000
a year, two mortgages, a lot of investments.
He'd have to fill out 12 forms in America.
I said, Michael, how do you pay your taxes?
He pops a beer.
He goes online.
The government's filled in every line.
If the numbers look right, he clicks OK.
It takes five minutes.
And, in Japan, you get a postcard from the
IRS that says, we think you made this much.
We withheld this much.
We owe you a refund of that much.
We will put it in your bank on April 1.
It takes one minute, if you think the numbers
are right.
And I said to my friend Togo (ph), you know,
in America, people spend hours, days filling
out these forms.
And he said to me, why would anybody want
to do that?
PAUL SOLMAN: And you explained to him nobody
does.
T.R.
REID: I said, nobody does, yes.
And guess what, Paul?
We could do that here.
The IRS could fill in every line of the returnfor most American families.
They know all the numbers.
Have you ever gotten a CP-2000 letter?
This is the one that says, on line 48-Q, you
entered $4,211.
PAUL SOLMAN: Oh, yes, yes.
T.R.
REID: But, actually, it should have been $4,681.
PAUL SOLMAN: Yes.
Actually, yes, yes.
T.R.
REID: And I get that every year, and I think,
why did I spend hours trying to fill this
out, when they knew?
And so some members of Congress have suggested
that the IRS fill out the forms for us.
And H&R Block and the tax software companies
lobby against it.
So here's the deal: You do more work; they
make more money.
PAUL SOLMAN: So what are the most egregious
absurdities of the tax system, in your view?
T.R.
REID: There are hundreds and hundreds of giveaways
for specific groups or specific companies.
I have this scene in my book where the president
goes to Congress and says, here's a great
idea.
Let's send a check for $7,500 to anybody whobuys a $138,000 BMW hybrid car.
We'd never do that, would we?
PAUL SOLMAN: No.
T.R.
REID: It's in the tax code.
I have a list here of stuff you get a write-off
for.
You ready?
PAUL SOLMAN: Yes, sure.
T.R.
REID: You get a write-off for contributing
to charity, taking a night school course.
PAUL SOLMAN: Hey, wait, stop.
Contributing to charity, surely, that's a
good thing.
You want to encourage people to give to charity,
right?
T.R.
REID: Yes, but it doesn't work.
Many countries have gotten rid of it, andhere's -- there's a pattern.
For one year, there's a small blip in contributions,
and then it goes up again at the rate of income
increase.
People give because they want to help.
PAUL SOLMAN: And, of course, the charitable
deduction is just one of thousands.
T.R.
REID: So, you get a deduction in America for
taking a night school course, growing sugarcane,
moving to a new city for a job, replanting
a forest, insulating the attic, destroying
old farm equipment, employing Native Americans,
commuting to work by bicycle, or buying a
plug-in hybrid sports car, or buying a recreational
vehicle.
I mean, there are hundreds of them, and most
of them are nuts.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, why can't we get rid of theseprovisions in the United States?
T.R.
REID: Because, in the United States, unlike
any other advanced democracy, money really
talks.
And there are more than 400 additions to the
tax code every year, and most of them are
giveaways to one or two taxpayers.
Now, if there were good reasons for these
clauses, they would put in there who's going
to benefit and what's it for.
But, in fact, if you read the tax code, it
says, here's a tax break for any company incorporated
in Delaware on October 13, 1916.
Now, that's General Motors, but they never
say that.
And the tax code is full of these things,
where they don't mention the name, but it
helps one taxpayer.
PAUL SOLMAN: Are Americans right to hate the
aptly named tax burden that we bear, both
in the income tax and taxes overall?
T.R.
REID: Well, we're right to hate how hard it
is to file.
But, if you take the amount, the check you
have to write, no, we're getting off easy.
Of the 35 richest countries, in total tax
burden, U.S. ranks 33rd.
And in return, our government spends less
as a percentage of GDP than other governments.
You hear all this stuff about spendthrift
big government?
Relative to other rich countries, our government
is a penny-pincher.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, we pay less, but we complain
more?
T.R.
REID: Yes.
Yes, Americans complain about tax more than
any other country.
In many countries, the IRS agency is the mostrespected government agency.
Get this.
In Japan, this movie "Marusa No Onna," "Audit
Bureau Woman," won best picture, best actor,
best actress.
It's about this perky, pretty young auditor
in the Tokyo tax bureau who goes after a big
evader.
He rides around Tokyo in this chauffeur-driven
white Rolls-Royce, and our heroine is chasing
him.
It's total David and Goliath.
And, in the end, she nails him, and everybody
in the audience cheers.
Can you imagine casting Meg Ryan as a peppy,
pretty IRS auditor who goes after people?
I don't think Hollywood would do that.
PAUL SOLMAN: Well, I was thinking Julia Roberts,
but, no, the IRS superhero remains an Oscar
long shot.
But there is hope for the system, says Reid.
T.R.
REID: Everybody in every party agrees that
our code is a mess.
It's unfair, it's complicated, it's inefficient,
needs to be fixed.
And the way to fix it is to do it big, asother countries have done.
So I think even the U.S. Congress will figure
this out.
PAUL SOLMAN: T.R.
Reid is one thoughtful and well-traveled journalist.
But I remain the "PBS NewsHour"'s skeptical
economics correspondent, Paul Solman, reporting
from Washington, D.C.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: Some California high
school students have chosen singing as a way
to examine a painful chapter in U.S. history.
Along the way, they're discovering some connections
to their own lives.
Jeffrey Brown reports from Los Angeles.
STUDENTS (singing): Where can I be an American,
if not in America?
JEFFREY BROWN: Where can I be an American,
if not here?
It's a question posed by students at Van Nuys
High school in Los Angeles, part of a 45-minute
oratorio they wrote and composed, working
and singing with professionals from the prestigious
Los Angeles Chorale.
Titled "In America," it's about the experience
of Japanese Americans forced to leave their
homes for internment camps during World War
II.
The Chorale has been doing this work in L.A.
schools for 15 years, choosing historical
themes the students would find relevant.
This time, says the Chorale's Alice Kirwan
Murray, who served as lead teaching artist,
they got more than they bargained for.
ALICE KIRWAN MURRAY, Los Angeles Master Chorale:
This story is an enormous tragedy, and I find
it fairly alarming that, 75 years ago, this
occurred.
But what I also found alarming was that the
students were not that surprised by it.
Many of them, as immigrants themselves, have
faced similar suspicion and bias and mistreatment.
It was very relatable to them.
JEFFREY BROWN: Van Nuys High has seen its
share of stars.
Among its famous students were Marilyn Monroe,
Robert Redford, and Natalie Wood.
This area and the school were once mostly
white, but now are majority Latino.
Some are very new immigrants, like sophomore
Rafael Gomez, who came here from Mexico last
summer.
RAFAEL GOMEZ, Student (through translator):
I enjoy singing this because it has a lot
of meaning, especially the part where it says,
don't judge me because I am different.
Just because someone is of a different race
or has a different color of skin, they shouldn't
be judged before you get to know them.
JEFFREY BROWN: To learn about this earlier
moment in American history, the students read,
researched, and visited L.A.'s Japanese American
National Museum, where they heard stories
of survivors of the camps.
Mas Yamashita was 6 when his family was sent
to Topaz camp in Utah.
MAS YAMASHITA, Held in Internment Camp: I
was able to tell them about my personal experiences,
and it seems to always help students to relate
to the experiences if they can meet somebody
who actually experienced it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Seniors Olivia Rodriguez and
Lucy White said they didn't know much about
that dark period of American history, until
now.
OLIVIA RODRIGUEZ, Student: How hard it was
for everyone to leave their homes and what
they knew, just a huge divide between the
American people, the Japanese American people,
and the Japanese-born people.
LUCY WHITE, Student: I really just wanted
to illustrate truthfully the awful, awful
struggle that these people went through and
that their country forced them into.
JEFFREY BROWN: The students also conducted
interviews with their own family members about
their own immigration stories.
Brianne Arevalo is the school's choir director.
BRIANNE AREVALO, Choir Director, Van Nuys
High School: Even students that weren't immigrants
themselves, they may have family members,
so maybe grandma and grandpa were immigrants,
neighbors.
Like, in this community, everybody knows some
immigrant.
And so whether they have gone through it personally
themselves or they were able to share in somebody
else's experience, every single student got
something so powerful and a really deep meaning
out of this project.
JEFFREY BROWN: For everyone involved, the
resulting work, nine movements in all, resonated
with today's political debates.
Olivia Rodriguez is a second-generation American
of Mexican heritage.
OLIVIA RODRIGUEZ: I repeatedly say, move to
America.
Move to America.
Live the American dream.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, what did those lines mean
to you?
OLIVIA RODRIGUEZ: I think I was trying to
be that hope for the people, and show how
important it was for these people to come
to America.
And then towards the end of the piece, towards
the end of the entire oratorio, so, by the
time I'm done, they're saying, how can I be
-- live in America if I'm not -- if I don't
feel American, if I'm not being treated like
another American?
JEFFREY BROWN: For Mas Yamashita, who attended
a final rehearsal, the emotions of long ago
were still raw.
MAS YAMASHITA: They were flashing pictures
from the camps, and the lyrics that the students
wrote, it was just -- just brings back a lotof those emotions for me.
I was ashamed of being in the camp.
I never told anybody.
It was probably 30 years before I discussed
the camp.
JEFFREY BROWN: Just because of the shame that
you felt.
MAS YAMASHITA: Yes.
It's my hope that people can really look at
this as saying, we can't isolate a group of
people just for who they are.
STUDENTS (singing): Don't suspect me because
I'm different.
JEFFREY BROWN: And for the Los Angeles Chorale,
this outreach is also about the power of art.
ALICE KIRWAN MURRAY: It is important to us
certainly to engage young people in the creative
arts, in performing arts, in choral arts.
It is the first art form, really, just the
human voice.
We all possess this.
So, for us to grab those students and let
them know that they have that ability, they
have that power, it's the ultimate communication.
JEFFREY BROWN: From Van Nuys High School in
Los Angeles, I'm Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, another in our Brief
But Spectacular series.
Tonight, attorney a longtime advocate for
criminal justice reform, shares his thought
on race and the legal system.
BRYAN STEVENSON, Founder, Equal Justice Initiative:
I was doing a hearing in the Midwest.
I had my suit and tie on.
I was there early.
It was the first time I had been in that courtroom.
And I sat down at defense counsel's table,
as I always do.
And the judge walked in.
And the judge said: "Hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
you get back out there and you wait out there
in the hallway until your lawyer gets here.
I don't want any defendant sitting in my courtroom
without their lawyer."
And I stood up and I said: "I'm sorry, Your
Honor.
I didn't introduce myself.
My name is BRYAN STEVENSON.
I am the lawyer.
And the judge started laughing, and the prosecutor
started laughing, and I made myself laugh,
because I didn't want to disadvantage my client.
But, afterwards, I was thinking, what is it
that, when this judge saw a middle-aged black
man, it didn't even occur to him that that
man sitting at defense counsel's table was
the lawyer?
I worry about that judge.
I worry that he's sentencing defendants of
color more harshly.
I worry that he doesn't value and accept the
testimony of black and brown witnesses the
way he does other people.
I worry that a narrative of racial difference
compromises his ability to provide fair and
just treatment of all people.
I don't think we're free in America.
I think we are burdened by our history of
racial inequality.
We have a history of horrific mistreatmentof people based on color.
And I think that narrative of racial difference
that was cultivated to justify that mistreatment
has created a kind of smog, and we have all
been breathing it in.
If you read the 13th Amendment, it doesn't
talk about narratives of racial difference.
It doesn't talk about ideologies of white
supremacy.
It only talks about involuntary servitude
and forced labor.
And, because of that, I don't think slavery
ended in 1865.
I think it just evolved.
We had decades of terrorism and violence where
black people were pulled out of their homes,
burned alive, hung, beaten to death, sometimes
literally on the courthouse lawn, and we never
talked about that.
And then we had this era of civil rights resistance
to racial segregation.
And we have made progress, but we haven't
confronted the narrative of racial difference,
unlike South Africa, where you are required
to hear about the damage done by apartheid,
unlike Germany.
In Berlin, Germany, you can't go 100 meters
without seeing markers or stones or monuments
placed near the homes of Jewish families abducted
during the Holocaust.
But, in this country, we don't talk about
slavery.
We don't talk about lynching.
We don't talk about segregation.
And our silence has condemned us.
When I went to Harvard Law School, my first
year, I didn't want people to know I started
my education in a colored school.
I didn't want them to know I was the great-grandson
of enslaved people.
I thought it might diminish me.
And then I realized that my power, if I have
any, my strength, if I have any, my insight,
if I have any, was shaped by those people
who survived slavery.
And it's in that story of survival that I
think we have some greatness that we can offer,
and not just people of color, but all of uswho've learned to overcome.
My name is Bryan Stevenson.
And this is my Brief But Spectacular take
on justice in America.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can watch additional
episodes of Brief But Spectacular on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
On the "NewsHour" online right now: It's exciting.
NASA scientists say the waters swirling under
the surface of Saturn's moon Enceladus may
possess life-sustaining features previously
seen only on Earth.
You can read all about their new findings.
That's on our Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for tonight.
On Friday, we will look at efforts to save
the historical convents of southern Spain.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right here tomorrow
evening with Mark Shields and David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS NewsHour," thankyou, and we will see you soon.